



RATS Working Group                                           H. Birkholz
Internet-Draft                                                  M. Eckel
Intended status: Standards Track                          Fraunhofer SIT
Expires: December 23, 2019                                 June 21, 2019


            An Information Model for Assertions used in RATS
              draft-birkholz-rats-information-model-latest

Abstract

   This document defines a standardized information model (IM) for
   assertions that can be used in remote attestation procedures (RATS).
   The information elements defined include attestation assertions which
   provide information about system components characteristics, and
   commonly used attributes and attribute structures used in protocols
   for remote attestation.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 23, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Document Structure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  RATS Information Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   5.  Change Log  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   Remote attestation procedures (RATS) are used to increase the trust
   in the trustworthiness of an attester.  This is typically
   accomplished by conveying attestation evidence from an attester to a
   verifier that is able to appraise the evidence.  The exact
   definitions of RATS roles, such as an attester or a verifier, are
   specified in the RATS architecture [I-D.birkholz-rats-architecture].
   This document defines the common information elements (IE) that are
   able to express the characteristics of an attester.  Ultimately,
   these IE can be used to compose attestation evidence (attestation
   assertions that are accompanied by a proof of their validity).

   In general, RATS convey information elements that:

   o  enable the functionality of remote attestation protocols,

   o  are able to express assertions about an attester's composition,
      configuration, or operational state,

   o  represent the provenance of assertions, including entities that
      provide assertions on behalf of the attester, and

   o  compose a type of proof of validity with respect to other
      assertions, and that

   o  are either verifiable (via comparison with trusted reference
      values) or non-verifiable.






Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


1.1.  Document Structure

   Every information element listed is annotated with one or more of
   these attributes:

   Protocol (P):  This IE is used on a remote attestation protocol
      layer, typically on the control plane or as protocol-specific data
      plane content.

   Hardware (H):  This IE expresses characteristics about an attester's
      hardware components or the composition of its hardware components.

   Software (S):  This IE expresses characteristics about an attester's
      software components or their semantic relationship.  The term
      software component - in the scope of this document - subsumes
      firmware, bootloader, BIOS/(U)EFI, and microcode.

   Operational State (O):  This IE is used to convey information about
      the combination of applied configuration and system state as
      defined in [RFC8342].

   Verifiable (V):  This IE requires reference integrity measurements
      (RIM), compliance-policy, certification-path, or another type of
      trust-chain in order to be appraised appropriately by a verifier.

   Additionally, every IE definition includes a reference to the source
   of its definition, if it is not specified in this document for the
   first time (which is the most likely case).  If a source of a
   definition is not a specification or (proposed) standard, but a
   draft, a web resource, or source that cannot be attribute with a DOI
   or ISSN, the following attribute is associated.

   Unstable (U):  The source of the definition of this IE may change in
      the future and is not considered to be stable at the time of
      publication of this document.

   Information elements might reference other information elements or
   have to be associated in a set (with or without a specific order) in
   order to convey the intended meaning to a verifier.  Reference to
   other IE inside this documents simply use their name as reference.
   In consequence, an IE can be a superstructure composed of other IE
   with its own name (and potentially additional definition text that
   defines its purpose and or usage).

   The RATS Information Model allows for expressing a hierarchical
   taxonomy.  If an IE is a specialisation of another IE, the last
   sentence in the definition includes a "This IE is a specialization of
   _IE NAME_".



Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


   The ordering of IE is in descending alphabetical order; independent
   of source or semantic relationship to other IE, or other types of
   hierarchy.

2.  RATS Information Elements

   Assertion Selection:  [P]

      A filter expression that enables the conveyance of a subset of all
      attestation assertions available to the attester, if requested by
      a verifier.

   Attestation Evidence:  [H, S, O, V]

   A composite IE that must include at least an Authentication-Secret
   Identifier, an Attester Identity, and at least one Attestation
   Assertion.  Attestation Evidence is always signed via the
   Authentication Secret and thereby binds the listed information
   elements cryptographically.  Attestation Evidence can only be trusted
   by a verifier if it is associated with a trust anchor the verifier
   also trusts.

   Attester Identifier:  [P, O, V]

      A value associated or bound to a distinguishable attester that is
      intended to uniquely identify it, but is not directly associated
      with a trust anchor.  Additional Endorsement Documents can
      increase the level of confidence in an Attester Identifier.

   Attester Identity:  [P, S, V]

      A document about a distinguishable attester issued and signed by a
      third party.  If not cryptographically associated with a trust
      anchor directly or indirectly, this IE is a specialization of
      Attester Identifier.

   Attestation Result:  [P]

      A set of one or more values that are created by an appraisal
      action of a verifier.  Attestation Result is the most generic
      definition of the output of RATS and are typically consumed by
      relying parties.

   Authentication-Secret Identifier:  [O, V]

      An identifier that is associated with an authentication secret
      used to sign attestation evidence.




Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


   Endorsement Document:  [P, H, S, V]

   A document about the capabilities and functionality of one or more
   sub-components of a distinguishable attester issued and signed by a
   third party.  Endorsement Documents are intended to render
   Attestation Evidence trustworthy.  If not cryptographically
   associated with a trust anchor directly or indirectly, this IE is a
   specialization of System Component Identifier.

   Nonce:  [P]

      TBD

   Origination:  TBD

      TBD

      Reference [I-D.mandyam-rats-eat]

   Universal Entity ID:  [P, H, V]

      A unique identifier permanently associated with an individual
      manufactured entity / device, such as a mobile phone, a water
      meter, a Bluetooth speaker or a networked security camera.  This
      IE is intended to either identify an device or a submodule or
      subsystem.  It does not identify types, models or classes of
      devices.  It is akin to a serial number, though it does not have
      to be sequential.  This IE is a specialization of System Component
      Identifier.

      Reference [I-D.mandyam-rats-eat]

3.  Security Considerations

   Probably none

4.  Acknowledgments

   TBD

5.  Change Log

   Initial version -00








Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


6.  Contributors

   TBD

7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-architecture]
              Birkholz, H., Wiseman, M., Tschofenig, H., and N. Smith,
              "Architecture and Reference Terminology for Remote
              Attestation Procedures", draft-birkholz-rats-
              architecture-01 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-basic-yang-module]
              Birkholz, H., Eckel, M., Bhandari, S., Sulzen, B., Voit,
              E., and G. Fedorkow, "YANG Module for Basic Challenge-
              Response-based Remote Attestation Procedures", draft-
              birkholz-rats-basic-yang-module-00 (work in progress),
              March 2019.

   [I-D.birkholz-rats-tuda]
              Fuchs, A., Birkholz, H., McDonald, I., and C. Bormann,
              "Time-Based Uni-Directional Attestation", draft-birkholz-
              rats-tuda-00 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.mandyam-rats-eat]
              Mandyam, G., Lundblade, L., Ballesteros, M., and J.
              O'Donoghue, "The Entity Attestation Token (EAT)", draft-
              mandyam-rats-eat-00 (work in progress), March 2019.

   [I-D.tschofenig-rats-psa-token]
              Tschofenig, H., Frost, S., Brossard, M., and A. Shaw,
              "Arm's Platform Security Architecture (PSA) Attestation
              Token", draft-tschofenig-rats-psa-token-01 (work in
              progress), April 2019.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8342]  Bjorklund, M., Schoenwaelder, J., Shafer, P., Watsen, K.,
              and R. Wilton, "Network Management Datastore Architecture
              (NMDA)", RFC 8342, DOI 10.17487/RFC8342, March 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8342>.





Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                    IMARA                        June 2019


7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.richardson-rats-usecases]
              Richardson, M., "Use cases for Remote Attestation common
              encodings", draft-richardson-rats-usecases-02 (work in
              progress), June 2019.

Authors' Addresses

   Henk Birkholz
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: henk.birkholz@sit.fraunhofer.de


   Michael Eckel
   Fraunhofer SIT
   Rheinstrasse 75
   Darmstadt  64295
   Germany

   Email: michael.eckel@sit.fraunhofer.de


























Birkholz & Eckel        Expires December 23, 2019               [Page 7]
